The dataset is based on an actual study, “Kim SK, Kim SY, Kim JH, Roh SA, Cho DH et al. (2014) A risk score classifier based on nineteen genes predicts the prognosis of patients with colorectal cancer.”

The article presents a study on colorectal cancer (CRC), which often experiences recurrence and metastasis. Their goal was to identify prognostic indicators, including how patients respond to chemotherapy. Using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data from 18 CRC patients, the researchers identified genes associated with cancer aggressiveness. From these genes, a risk scoring system was developed and validated based on 19 genes regulated by TREM1 or CTGF, two regulators activated in CRC.

The study demonstrated that this risk score is a significant prognostic indicator, especially in patients with stage III cancer. The TCA19 score effectively predicted which patients could benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy, even in patients older than 75 years, who are commonly excluded from these treatments. This predictor offers a novel tool to identify patients with high risk and potential benefit from chemotherapy, thereby improving personalized treatment decisions.

Furthermore, molecular analysis suggests that activation of TREM1 and CTGF regulators is strongly linked to CRC progression and metastasis. The TCA19 scoring system was also validated in several patient cohorts, showing its clinical relevance for predicting disease-free survival.
The dataset contains RNA sequencing data from 18 subjects, but samples were taken (and this is very important) from different tissues of these subjects, normal large bowel tissue, primary colon cancer and progressive liver metastasis (with colon origin)[1]. That said, the final number of samples is actually 54[1]. For this tutorial, 37 relevant samples will be used, 18 normal samples and 19 primary colon cancer samples. Why these? Well, the basic logic for any potential biomarker discovery is to compare cancer samples to non-cancer samples and see the differences in their gene expressions.
Cancer samples will be compared to normal samples in over 50 000 genes and we want to identify the expression differences between them (the most important ones).

Why is it important that these samples, both normal and cancerous, are taken from the same subjects? Because this design limits confounding variables that could affect the analysis (most other variables in this context are fixed), allowing for better causal inference of possible oncogenes (this will be discussed later).
The DESeq2 (Bioconductor) package will be used to perform the differential expression analysis, identifying some potentially disease-relevant genes from a data set of over 50 000.
Install the packages and load the experiment and dataset files and let's see how they look in R (RStudio)!
